Welcome to the Software Freedom Podcast.
This podcast is presented to you by the Free Software Foundation Europe, where a charity
that empowers users to control technology.
I'm Matthias Kirchner, the President of the Free Software Foundation Europe, and I'm
doing this podcast with my colleague, Bonnie Mehring.
Hello!
In this episode, we will talk about artificial intelligence and free software, which
for me is also a lot about the question, how do this will power between computers or machines
and humans on the other side.
Our guest for today is Versa Le Cartier.
He is an active FSFE contributor in our French team, our system hackers team, and
regularly also gives talks for the FSFE.
In his state chart, he is a PhD student at the University of Claude Bernard, researching
about artificial intelligence for healthcare systems.
Hello Versa.
Hello Bonnie.
Hello, Matthias.
Hello Versa.
To just go ahead, Versa, when we talk about artificial intelligence, I automatically
think of Hall from 2001, a Space Odyssey or a Samantha, the artificial intelligence
from the movie Her.
Is this how I should imagine artificial intelligence looks like?
You know, I never got around to seeing the 2001 Space Odyssey movie, but I did watch
the movie Her.
I found it a bit creepy, but I don't think that we are anywhere close to making voice
assistant with emotions and personality.
But AI is much more than interactive robots.
It encompasses a lot of different techniques, aiming at simulating, point-some-cases,
surpassing human intelligence.
It also includes chat bots, voice recognition, text translation, bots in video games, and
so on.
A formal definition of artificial intelligence may be any system that can learn how to
perform a task based on observation.
If I want to cite practical examples of AI, I might say things like Minecraft, the voice
assistant, that is a free software.
OK, so we do have artificial intelligence in our lives.
Yes, whether we read it or not, AI is here for us, and it's a powerful technology that
has been in our lives since maybe one decades or two.
Vasa, in your presentations about your work with AI, your main demand there was in the
past that artificial intelligence should be accessible, transparent, and fair.
I think it would be very interesting for our listeners to dive more into those criteria
and what you understand about that.
Maybe we could start with the fairness part, Bonnie, you had some questions when we were
preparing for this.
Do you want to go ahead?
Yes, please.
Vasa, I was wondering, what does fairness mean for an AI?
Would it be seen as unfair if an AI does not follow the laws of a society like the law
to not discriminate any people no matter of the race, sex, or gender?
So yes, if I want to define fairness for artificial intelligence, fairness will mean the equality
of treatments for everyone for the less of things that you don't want to include in
your prediction models.
For example, you might want to have a fair artificial intelligence that do not take into
account your gender or your race or your religion or your age or any kind of sensitive attributes.
Do you have an example of how an AI could discriminate someone?
Yes, so I have a couple of examples.
That was the case of racial bias in healthcare a couple of years ago.
This has been reported in a research article whose title is Disacting Racial Bias in
an Algorithm used to manage the health of population.
And in this article, the authors found that widely used algorithm used to assess the risk
of health issues, so the health issues of people had racial bias.
And this algorithm is used to identify high-risk patients, which get more care resources
and attention from the hospital staff.
But unfortunately, the issue with this algorithm is that to get the same risk score as white
people, black people had to be much more sick.
And this is presumably caused by raising the risk estimation on the health of the people,
but also on the estimated health care cost.
So as you can see, AI bias can have important real-world consequences.
And I can give you another example this time in the US justice system.
There is a proprietary software called the Compass used to tell how likely someone is going
to receive the data in their client.
An analysis by Kopelbika revealed that the algorithm was racist.
It turned out that compared to white people, black people at a much higher risk of being
falsely considered as risky criminals that are going to commit their crimes again.
So in other words, the algorithm told that black people were much more dangerous for societies
than white people.
And conversely, white people were often misclassified as low-risk difference, which means unlikely
to receive their crimes.
So the false positive rate was much higher for black people compared to white people and
so reverse for the false negative rate.
Again, this shows that unfair algorithms exist in the wild and that they are using critical
cases.
And on top of that, those two algorithms aren't free software.
OK, before I go over to my next question, could you shortly describe what false positive
and false negative means?
Yes, so to explain false positive and false negative and true positive and two negatives,
I will give you an example based on the spam detection.
So the spam are emails you don't want to see and to tackle spam.
There are some software that is used to classify whether an email is a spam or a legitimate
email.
So if you get a message and it's completely legitimate email, but the software classifies
it as spam, it will be called a false positive because the software thought that the email
was a spam, but it wasn't.
If the email was in fact a spam, but the software thought it was completely legitimate, it will
be called a false negative because the software thought that the email wasn't a spam.
And so the true positive and the true negatives are correct classifications, meaning that the
software correctly classified the emails as spam or legitimate email.
So this is an example that can be used to explain this concept.
Vasa, I also have a question about what you just said.
So I mean you said that sometimes there are mistakes that happen.
But I mean when we look back in history of a humankind, there were a lot of occasions
when humans on purpose discriminated certain groups.
And a lot of that was also done on purpose with architecture, with technical means, like
for example in Lauren Slasik's book with whom we also talked about regulation before
in one of the podcasts, there's an example of how bridges and train lines were used to
make it harder for certain minorities to go to other parts of a city and get better
jobs.
How can we find out if something is done by mistake or if that's on purpose when you
have an AI involved?
So if you have only the new result of the AI, I mean if you have only the predictions,
then you cannot really know the intent like the is the purpose of the predictions.
What you need is a source code.
So free software will help you to know the purpose behind the predictions because you know
what the input of the AI was and you can also know what where the design behind the prediction
model.
So you can guess how the data was processed and how the algorithm was used and that way
you know the purpose of the AI and also you can know how the model was evaluated.
I mean what metric was used to evaluate the performance of the artificial intelligence.
So you can know for example if the true positive rate was the same whether the person was
a male or a female or black or white or whatever and if you can do this kind of test then
you can see if the AI was there.
So by seeing this source code and with transparency then you can guess the purpose.
So this part is now about the demand for transparency you talk about in your presentations, right?
Yeah, I think that the result connection between how transparent an algorithm is and
how fair can be because much like when we talk about security and free software I think
that we need transparency for algorithm to ensure that they are fair.
If you cannot see the source code of AI and if it's not transparent then you cannot
ensure that it will be fair.
Much like you cannot really be sure about the security of the software if you cannot
see the source code of it.
Is it the case that if you have the source code of the AI that this would be sufficient
to understand how it's actually working or do you also need a lot of the training data
or other data where the AI learned from?
I think that to answer your question to really understand the AI you will need three things
basically.
You will need the data that was used to train the AI or if the data is really sensitive
they can you cannot access to it you can have the its characteristics.
So what were the variables and what were their distribution how did they look like?
Then you need to know how the AI was trained.
So what was the source code used to train the AI?
And then you need to be able to evaluate the AI.
You need to have some kind of metric that tells if the AI was accurate and if the accuracy
was the same regardless of some kind of attribute such as your age or gender or any kind
of protected attribute.
From my understanding one thing that AI is able to do is to very quickly adapt and learn
way, way faster than humans are.
So when we are now talking about source code is it correct that that means that in one
time like one minute it is that source code and a few minutes later it's completely different
and the AI might act on different rules or how should I mention that?
So I don't really think that AI learns faster than humans do because I mean if you like
show 10 pictures of cats to a two years old he or she will be able to you know recognize
cats or any kind of animal but for AI you need to put through the algorithm like millions
or billions of images for it to grow any kind of subject.
So I don't think this is generally true that the algorithm is faster.
It just appears to be because we have a lot of computational power so we can use a lot
of computation to train algorithms for days and days and days in data centers.
So for an AI to work you have to train it with the right data, with the right training
code and evaluate its performance in a good way that measure how fair it is and after
you have to monitor its accuracy through this series.
You have to check if the furnace of the algorithm stays the same and if the AI furnace drops
you have to like stop using it and you have to detect it and then retrain your AI with
new data or with a new source code to make sure that the furnace is good.
So yeah, this is the source code of the AI, this change and let's be checked.
So that means that the AI itself would also have to be set up in a way that it's documenting
itself in a way that humans understand that.
Do I understand it correct, Vasa?
Yes, so what you need is to make sure that the AI can give you some kind of metrics or
furnace regularly, like each day you measure the furnace core so that you can have some
kind of measure and you can detect the automatism in the furnace.
I do have a basic question here because you have already mentioned the training data
for an artificial intelligence, who actually trains an artificial intelligence, how should
I imagine that the data looks like?
For example, if you take Alexa, one of the examples you gave at the beginning for an AI,
who trains Alexa, would this be Amazon or is it a person at home?
So an AI is trained both with data and resource code.
Basically, when you are using Alexa or any kind of like a voice recording device, you create
data that is used to train Alexa again.
So you participate in the training of the AI because your data is used, but the training
code is done by Amazon, so because Alexa is proprietary, we can really only guess what
is happening there, but I guess that its data scientist is a trained AI, often with
research tools.
AI is developed a lot with Open Source software and it's done inside companies by data scientist.
I can imagine when you have lots of data and you have to train such an AI that also means
that you need a lot of processing power from the AI you deal with, is it something that
you can actually run on your computer or do people have to imagine that more like you
need huge data centers to train an AI or how do you have to think about that?
So it depends on what you want and also it depends on the AI itself.
If you want to like reproduce the state of the art, I mean the paper that just was published
last month and will produce all their results, well you can see if you don't have like giant
data centers with entire teams that monitor like computers and stuff, so you need a lot
of money and computing power to do that.
Because you need to train your AI for a lot of time and with a lot of data, by a lot
of data I mean like gigabytes or terabytes of data.
But thankfully you can still with your home computer, I mean with your laptop, you can
still get good results if you have like more modest intent.
Because of improvements in the hardware, like with GPUs, I mean graphical processing
units, getting cheaper and cheaper, you can have powerful machines at home and you can
use them to train some AI.
And that's also possible because of free software.
Because free software is available to you, you can use it yourself and so you can you
can train it on your personal computer and it will work, it will work also because you
can leverage already trained model.
What you can do is to take the already existing models and incorporate them inside your
world.
You can take the state of the art model and just train some part of it to report for your
needs.
So I think that it's a very powerful technique and that makes you able to use AI with your
simple, I mean basic computers and still have amazing results.
So you kind of use pre-trained AI and continue with this.
Yes, you can use retrained AI for a lot of command tasks such as image classification
or like for example an LP model, like natural language processing models that have gathered
a lot of knowledge about language and you can take these giant big models and you can
use them as part of your own model.
For example, there is a very large AI competition that is called ImageNet.
In this competition, you have to classify I think 10,000 different categories of dogs
or animals or objects or things.
So you have 10,000 different things to classify.
And this is a competition done by researchers or scientists.
And so the winner, so the model that is the most accurate at doing that is often released
publicly as free software.
So what you can do if like let's say that you want to classify between two different
things like cats, the three dogs.
For example, you have images of cats and images of dogs.
What you can do instead of starting from scratch is to take these big models and repose
it for your needs.
So you can train only part of it and reduce the 10,000 classification levels to only cats
and dogs.
And that will be much more fast and efficient than starting from scratch.
So I think we are now already partly in the accessibility part.
So I mean, we talked about the fairness, we talked about transparency.
Now with the accessibility, I mentioned, I mean, one part is that the tools are free software.
So you can use them for any purpose that you can understand how they work that you can
share them with others and that you can make modifications.
Is there anything else which is necessary for AI's that they are accessible?
Yes.
So what you need is a powerful hardware, but thankfully, as I said, powerful hardware is getting
cheaper every day.
So you can have accessible hardware that you can use to like train your own artificial
intelligence.
But unfortunately, the drivers for this graphical processing unit comes are proprietary.
Like that, I mean that the software that is used to make your card communicate to your
computer is proprietary, that prevents AI from being fully accessible, unfortunately.
So it makes AI training with software much more complicated that it should be.
So maybe we're sad to summarize it a bit to this point.
So for fairness, what do we need that you haven't fair AI?
So you need to be able to measure the fairness of the AI.
You need to evaluate how fair it is with some kind of score.
And then you need to be able to monitor this score to make sure that it stays the same.
And then you need to make sure that this score has been well established because I mean,
there are multiple definitions of fairness.
And so you can leverage it in different ways.
So you have to agree with all stakeholders to make sure that your fairness definition
is good considering your problem attend.
And then you need to, as I said, monitor the fairness of the software.
Could you also summarize transparency and accessibility for us?
Yes.
Transparency of AI means adding access to the data that was used to train the algorithm.
Or at least be able to know the characteristics of the input data.
Then you need to have access to this whole score of the AI.
And then you need to define a metric that is used to tell if the model is accurate.
And also if it's accurate for every values of a protected attribute.
And then you need to make sure that everything is released as a free software.
And also what is great with regard to transparency is that recently,
with the Free Software Foundation Europe, what we want to do is to have open science.
So open science means to have science accessible to all and to consider software
as a result of the research.
As a citizen, you should be able to have access to the data that was used to the research
and also to its source code.
And all of that was used to create an AI.
And so with these two things, you are able to have access to the artificial intelligence
and to make it transparent.
So to summarize the accessibility point, what you need is to be able to train the AI yourself.
We need to have free software to train AI.
So we need to have full frameworks and methods to train artificial intelligence.
We need also to have cheap and reliable hardware to train artificial intelligence.
And you need to have free drivers to be able to control these GPUs.
Is there any AI out there which implements those three criteria?
So do we have any positive examples there?
So yeah, unfortunately, I don't know any kind of AI that is like for accessible
and transparent at the same time.
And I think it's really bad and we can do much better with regard to these three things.
So yeah, no AI is perfect yet.
Do you know of any upcoming legislations in Europe that are planning on implementing
those three criteria for an AI?
No, unfortunately not.
I'm not aware of any kind of legislation that is ongoing, but fortunately it's a result
because the European Commission released a white paper in February.
Its title is on artificial intelligence, European approach to excellence and trust,
which talks about AI transparency.
And it demands that the data about the data used to train models
and how their accuracy is measured is provided to everyone.
So this is not a legislation, but I think it's an 8.20 right direction.
So there's hope.
Vasa, to wrap it up, what are the biggest challenges you see for free software
in the field of artificial intelligence at the moment?
So I think that artificial intelligence is really powerful.
I mean, we have met a lot of progress.
And it's like in some regard, AI is much better than humans.
Like it can run for hours without any kind of concentration issues.
I mean, it never gets bored and it has a consistent behavior.
And you know, it can remember a lot of information.
So I think that for these points, AI has a lot of advantages
over their models.
But I think that, yeah, AI can be leveraged to improve society.
But I'm afraid of AI for a couple of reasons.
I think that the first one would be aggressive behavior.
So for example, AI systems are employed to filter out, you know,
helpful content or to detect copyright infringement.
And it's done in a non-tomated way.
And with limited human oversight.
And more specifically, for example, YouTube use AI
to detect unauthorized use of copyright materials.
But sometimes it gets things wrong.
And it doesn't understand things like priorities or means
or more generally they're used.
I think that being able to test AI and measure its furnace
and be able to detect when it gets things wrong
is one big challenge for a furnace.
One point I'm also thinking a little bit about is
when people or companies say, well, we don't know
why this was the result of our software.
It's so complex, we cannot understand it anymore.
So we're sorry about that, but it was the AI.
So when people say something like that, do you think that's true?
Or do you think that this is something they
rather use as an apology?
So I think that the decade I grew it was true
because we weren't able to really understand the AI.
I mean AI can sometimes give a lot of good predictions.
But we are not able to interpret it.
Because the neural networks and the technologies
used to make predictions are so complex
that we are not able to interpret the results.
In a way that we aren't able to connect the input to the output.
I mean, how we are able to know what in the input
led to the prediction.
But I think that we are getting better at this.
And we are researching ways to interpret the results of the AI.
So if companies or people want to not to take responsibility for that,
it's probably rather that maybe they don't know
at the moment why certain decisions are happening like that.
But they also maybe don't want to know at the moment.
Because if they would like to know,
they would have the means to find out
why certain decisions are made by the AI.
Yes, yes, but I think that it boils down to too many.
I think that being able to produce a system
that is interpretable costs a lot of money.
And it takes a lot of time.
And so you need to be able to spend money
to create powerful AI that are well designed,
that are transparent, that are fair, accessible,
and that you are able to interpret.
So I think that one issue with this is time and money.
If you now think about what we talked
and maybe also about how AI without free software
could shape and control our future,
are you then afraid of the increasing usage of artificial intelligence
in our society?
I think that with this issue with our full AI
that are perpetually and that don't have any kind of human oversight.
So with the danger, because as I gave examples earlier,
artificial intelligence has a lot of consequences in our world.
And sometimes it's good, but sometimes it's leads to mistakes
or things that we don't want to see.
And I think that it's a bit scary, to be honest,
to have these systems that we aren't able to access
and we aren't able to inspect because they are appropriate.
And also I'm a bit scared about AI
because of its impact on the environment.
Because a lot of jobs will be replaced with AI at some point.
And I hope that we will find a way to not put people
whose jobs might become irrelevant
in an embarrassing situation.
And how about an AI that would be free software?
Would you then be afraid?
A bit less, because with free software,
we are able to inspect how the AI works.
And so we are able to take a lot of issues.
We are with a proprietary AI.
And with this, we can visual how accurate it is,
how fair it is.
And I think that it should be mandatory
and it's a much less scary to have AI that are open and accessible.
So Vesa, unfortunately, we are coming to the end.
So I think this topic is a big challenge for human freedoms.
And I'm not sure yet how exactly AI should look in future.
I think on the way there, we will learn a lot
and also make some good and some bad experience.
But in general, the idea you're promoting
that supporting people building AI
that is accessible, transparent and fair
seems like a good first step for humankind.
Even if that process might then sometimes be slower
if you don't apply those criteria.
So thank you already very much for talking with us about AI.
In our podcast, we always, at the end, have one question.
And I would also like to ask that to you.
So as our regular visitors know, on the 14th of February,
we always celebrate the I love free software day
so that not just the flower industry benefits from this day.
And we use this day to thank free software developers
and communities out there for the effort and work
to making our society a better place to live.
But of course, the 14th of September
shouldn't be the only day where you thank people
for their work for free software.
I wanted to ask you the question,
is there any software out there
or any developer out there whom you would like to thank or to mention?
Yes, so I'd like to mention a few software.
So I want to thank Perras,
the Artificial Intelligence Framework.
So it's a software that is used to build
Artificial Intelligence very easily.
And I'm also very grateful for the by-dodge
developerism.
I think it's a project for me from Facebook.
And also to the TensorFlow software done by Google.
And I'm deeply thankful for this
because I'm based in my PhD project on those software.
And so far, it's been working great.
And I'm also really thankful for the modular community
for developing the Firefox web browser
because it's a web browser that I already like.
Because it's free software.
It respects your privacy.
It's powerful.
It's fast.
So yeah.
Thank you, Vasa.
You're welcome.
We're talking with us about Artificial Intelligence
and Free Software.
This was the software Freedom Podcast.
If you liked this episode, please recommend it to your friends
and rate it.
Also subscribe to make sure you will get the next episode.
This podcast is presented to you by the Free Software Foundation Europe,
where a charity that works on promoting software freedom.
If you like our work, please consider supporting us with a donation.
You'll find more information under fsfe.org,
/donate.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much, Vasa.